# DigitRecogniserUsingSOM
Unsupervised learning with Self-Organizing Maps: MNIST
In this notebook, I will provide a short example of how Kohonen Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) can be used for dimensionality reduction and unsupervised learning. I will use the MNIST dataset provided by Kaggle to train a SOM and project the handwritten digits to a two-dimensional map that (hopefully) preserves the topological property of the original dataset. Although a number of alternative methods can be used to obtain competitive results in less time (in particular supervised learning with CNN is known to be extremely effective), the visual nature of the dataset and the easy interpretation of its elements (common handwritten digits) make it ideal to explore the capabilities of this method and understand how SOM work.
This notebook was inspired by Interactive Intro to Dimensionality Reduction, by Anisotropic, where a number of common dimensionality reduction and clustering methods are presented.

What are SOM?
In brief, Self-organizing maps are a type of artificial neural network based on competitive learning (at variance to error-correcting learning typical of other NNs). The idea is to iteratively adapt a connected two-dimensional matrix of vectors (or nodes) to the higher-dimensional topology of the input dataset. At each cycle, a node is selected and its elements (the weights) are updated, together with those of its neighbors, to approach a randomly chosen datapoint from the training set. The competitive element comes into play during the update stage, since the closest node (according to a chosen metric) to the extracted datapoint is selected for the weights update at each iteration.
SOMs are particularly suited for cases where low-dimensional manifolds are hidden in higher dimensions and are often used together and/or competing with other dimensionality reduction methods and in particular Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for which it could be seen as a non-linear generalization: an exhaustive explanation of SOM's advantages and disadvantages, however, is beyond the scope of this notebook, but there are plenty of resources online for those who would like to know more.
